---
layout: post
title: On blogging, procrastination, and naivety
---

I haven't written a blog for ages. This is partly because I'm lazy, and I procrastinate (I've certainly got lots of half-baked drafts and sets of notes for things I've vaguely meant to write about at some point). It's also partly because I'm never sure if what I have to say is interesting, novel, or even just *correct* enough to publish.

However, I think I might have got my priorities wrong here. Two of the blogs I'm enjoying most at the moment are [My Husband's stupid record collection](http://alltherecords.tumblr.com/) and [Go Free Range's](http://gofreerange.com/) series of posts on their [attempts to build a bank](http://gofreerange.com/project-credit-union-day-1). It strikes me that they both have something in common; they're both being written as part of a process of learning and discovering something, not as an artifact resulting from that process. I hope Chris and James (of Go Free Range) and Sarah (of MHSRC) won't be offended by my choice of words here (I mean this as a compliment), but I like how both of them make a virtue of their naivity. Being shown someone else's process of discovery is a much more compelling way of learning than simply being shown the point at which they arrived.

This also seems related to [Tom](http://codon.com)'s post on [Not knowing what you're doing](http://codon.com/i-have-no-idea-what-im-doing). That process of procrastination, and deliberating over the value of what I'm writing which I mentioned at the start sounds a little like the impostor syndrome that Tom describes. Equally though, using writing to document a process of learning and discovery (in the way that Free Range and MHSRC do) also sounds a bit like the *material exploration* that Tom describes; where the material being explored is THE VERY FABRIC OF MY MIND ITSELF. So, from now on, I'm going to attempt to do the same - write a little and often on everything I'm learning and thinking about. I hope this'll help me organize and process what I've learned, as well as posing interesting questions to explore further.
