---
layout: post
title: Why I joined the Labour party yesterday
---

At the beginning of the last week, I was pretty certain I was going to vote Green in today's general election. I live in a safe Labour seat, and figured that a vote for the Green party would make a worthwhile message on a national level, while not harming the prospect of returning our excellent local Labour MP, [Stella Creasy](http://walthamstow.networkmaker.org/).

However, after a good deal of thought, yesterday I joined the Labour party, spent 5 hours delivering leaflets for Stella, and today I'll be voting for her. I'd like to explain the reasons for this slightly drastic change of heart.

Firstly, on a purely local level, in her interactions with her constituents, it is clear that Stella understands the representative nature of our democracy - she clearly and transparently represents the interests of her constituents, rather than seeking a platform in itself. None of the other candidates at the hustings last week gave me this impression, and (the [rather pathetic twitter squabble](https://twitter.com/mistertim/status/593504071023104000) between the Green and TUSC candidates afterwards put me off both).

Secondly, and still dealing with pragmatics - the right wing press are almost certainly going to make the (entirely spurious in constitutional terms) argument that any party entitled to govern (as a minority or as the main party in coalition) should have received both the largest number of seats *and* the largest share of the popular vote. In this environment, every vote for Labour is a vote for a Labour-led government, safe-seat or not.

Finally, and most importantly, I'll deal with matters of principle. I'll be the first to acknowledge that the Labour manifesto for this election (politely) leaves a lot to be desired. The economically illiterate (and probably impossible, without the ability to predict the future) commitment to enshrine deficit reduction in law, the dog-whistling on immigration, none of this is anything I support. However, I still think that a vote for the Labour party is still the best option for anyone whose politics include even an ounce of compassion for or solidarity with their fellow humans, and in particular for anyone who is disenchanted with the political status quo. This obviously seems paradoxical - voting for the party who held power as recently as 5 years ago and who have drifted slowly towards a cosy centre-right position sounds like a terribly way to express disenchantment with the status quo. However, I believe that to believe this is to miss the point of electoral democracy, and of the Labour party's role within it.

Every party, at every election, promises change. The status quo (or at least the bits we don't like) will be overturned, and replaced wholesale with something more palatable to their supporter base. This is almost always empty rhetoric (I, more than most, have felt this keenly - I campaigned and voted for the Lib Dems at the last election). Therefore, voting for anyone promising wholesale change is almost certain to lead to disappointment. Revolutions are won on the street, not at the ballot box. Despite this though, voting, and specifically voting for Labour, is still fundamentally important to anyone with any sort of socialist or social democratic principles, for two reasons.

Firstly, as [Phil puts it](http://averypublicsociologist.blogspot.co.uk/2015/05/im-voting-labour-because-reasons.html): "A Labour or Labour-led government offers many of the people at the bottom immediate relief". I'm one of the lucky ones. I'm healthy, have secure housing and a steady income on which I can live comfortably. Many people don't have all or any of these things, and for those people, a Labour government will have immediate tangible benefits. This is more important than matters of principle. People are dying, starving, and suffering as a result of the actions of the last government. Our first priority must be to stop the immediate assault on the poor. The Labour manifesto may not be perfect, but it will offer relief for those suffering the most.

Secondly, unlike the Greens, the SNP or any fringe left group, the Labour party is the product of over a century's struggle on the part of working people for the right to self-determination. While it's present state leaves a lot to be desired, this history of the cumulative struggles of workers is still an important one. The fact that we have a welfare state, the fact that we have an NHS, the fact that we have the vote at all, are rights which were won by the labour movement, and the fact that the Labour party is a force in government today is the culmination of that movement. Labour are still the only left party with a claim to represent the majority of working people of the UK, and, in my opinion, any socialist movement *has* to be able to make that claim, and no other group on the British left can, at present. The challenge then, is to ensure that the Labour party reflects the will and the interests of working people as a whole, which is exactly why I took the decision to join, yesterday. As a worker and a socialist, I know the sort of Labour party I'd like to see, and I now believe that the best way of encouraging that party to take shape is by getting involved in it directly. I'm not alone here, either - the [Campaign for Labour Party Democracy](http://home.freeuk.net/clpd/#.VUsu7NNVhBc) campaign for the trade union link, and for a democratic, member-led policy making process. The [Labour Representation Committee](http://www.l-r-c.org.uk/) advocate for socialist values within the party, and [SERA](http://sera.org.uk/) campaign for environmental issues. By supporting these three groups, and others like them, I'm confident that I can help rebuild a principled, socialist labour party which truly represents the interests of working people, and that to do so is the best choice for other like-minded people.
