---
layout: post
title: "Weeknotes:  15th - 21st June 2015"
---

Most of this week I spent trying to condense my thoughts on my general research
direction into a more formal proposal that explains the motivation for my own
work and its place in relation to the published literature.

As part of this, I revisited some of the papers that I'd encountered during my
literature review which had most shaped my direction thus far - in particular
[Si√¢n Lindley's
work](http://dl.acm.org/citation.cfm?id=2187836.2187979&coll=DL&dl=ACM) on the
relationship between users computing activities and their daily routines and
habits. Going back through that paper, and the work it builds upon (in
particular, Tye Rattenbury's work on
[Plasticity](http://dl.acm.org/citation.cfm?id=1409667)), as well as Lindley's
later work on [time and
technology](http://research.microsoft.com/pubs/241770/p1442-lindley.pdf) has
helped me make a better case for the importance of activity tracking
/ life-logging to information retrieval. The idea of 'plastic activities' which
expand and contract to fill the available time, and the way in which a user's
experience of the web can exist in multiple temporalities (for instance, when
looking at a social media timeline, the difference between when a post was
created and when it was viewed) both highlight the idea that users computing
habits are tied up with the routines and rhythms of their everyday life, and
that tools that assist with these habits need to model these rhythms
effectively. I'm now pretty happy with the general direction my research is
taking, and am going to spend the next week working on the specifics of a pilot
experiment.

Otherwise:

 * I caught up with Marios and Jiyin about how we can all work together on the
   work that's common to all our projects.
 * Started the process of setting up some office-wide informal interest-groups
   for both UCL and BBC folk with common interests, by creating and sending out
a survey on everyone's interests. I got plenty of interest in a Machine Learning
group, and have organised a first meeting for the beginning of July.
 * Had a chat to some BBC people about a project I might help them out with over
   the next few months.
 * Listened to a few more episodes of the [Talking
   Machines](http://www.thetalkingmachines.com/) podcast, which has tons of
interesting information and discussion. Highlights: [David Blei talking about
the role of Topic Modelling in the
Humanities](http://www.thetalkingmachines.com/blog/2015/5/7/interdisciplinary-data-and-helping-humans-be-creative)
and
a [two](http://www.thetalkingmachines.com/blog/2015/5/7/interdisciplinary-data-and-helping-humans-be-creative)
[part](http://www.thetalkingmachines.com/blog/2015/3/13/how-machine-learning-got-where-it-is-and-the-future-of-the-field)
conversation between Geoffrey Hinton, Yoshua Bengio and Yann Lecun, as well as
an interesting
[introduction](http://www.thetalkingmachines.com/blog/2015/3/13/how-machine-learning-got-where-it-is-and-the-future-of-the-field)
to Determinantal Point Processes, which sound like they could be an interesting
technique to use in my research as a way of optimising the diversity of a set of
search results or recommendations.
 * Went to see [Dan Deacon](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=mBjNJnRTXrE) at Oval Space on Tuesday Evening

<strong>Interesting reading:</strong>

 * This [article from Paul Krugman](http://krugman.blogs.nytimes.com/2015/04/10/apple-and-the-self-surveillance-state/?module=BlogPost-Title&version=Blog%20Main&contentCollection=Opinion&action=Click&pgtype=Blogs&region=Body&_r=0) which has been sat in my open browser tabs for ages, which has an interesting analysis of the economic and social factors driving the adoption of 'self-surveillance' technology.
 * Interesting article about the history of [Holywell street](http://www.unofficialbritain.com/lost-london-a-victorian-street-for-friggers-and-radicals/) - a London
   street which no longer exists - and was once known for both political
radicalism and pornography, and the interesting connections between the two.
 * An article on the Rhythmicon, the [world's first drum
   machine](http://daily.redbullmusicacademy.com/2015/06/rhythmicon-feature)
- which is incredibly interesting, both for the history of the instrument and
  the music it was designed to perform, but also for what it shows us about the
development of interactive technology to overcome human limitations.
 * [Google Research's images generated from deep neural networks](http://googleresearch.blogspot.co.uk/2015/06/inceptionism-going-deeper-into-neural.html) - which, as well as being fascinating in their own right, reminded me a lot of [Abigail Sellen's thoughts](http://blog.timcowlishaw.co.uk/2015/06/11/designing-computer-systems-that-see/) on the role of perception in intelligent systems, in that they're a great example of how we can understand how a complex algorithm works better by seeing how it perceives the world.
 * This [fascinating, sad, eye-opening piece of investigative journalism](http://www.dagbladet.no/spesial/vatdraktmysteriet/eng/) - a quest to identify a nameless body washed up on the Norwegian coast which leads to the migrant camps at Calais.
 * [First the gangsters, then the bankers](http://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/jun/18/gangsters-then-bankers-the-long-good-friday-foretold-the-future-thatcherism-londons-docklands) - A great essay on  how The Long Good Friday predicted the gentrification of London under Thatcherism and since.
 * [Some interesting thoughts on machine perception](https://suboptimum.wordpress.com/2015/06/21/we-have-stumbled-in-the-era-of-machine-psychology/), and the case for a 'machine psychology'.

<strong>Music:</strong> [This lovely live recording](http://thequietus.com/articles/18126-listen-hauschka-live-improvisation)  of Hauschka,  [Nick Cave and the Bad Seeds](https://open.spotify.com/album/22OxY6VhKgyd6Tx7ioi5L4), Some [Hyperdub Records](https://open.spotify.com/album/7lWZBylSfygoS8WRczT7Sn) stuff, [Dan Deacon](https://open.spotify.com/album/05cihLeGrisaOseQdhxDcr), [Yellow Swans](https://open.spotify.com/album/4Rti9CCEIh5I2ftLnojajm).

